# What Problems do ERC777 and ERC1363 Solve?

## ERC777

Link to specs: https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-777
Code: https://github.com/OpenZeppelin/openzeppelin-contracts/blob/release-v4.9/contracts/token/ERC777/ERC777.sol

The main motivations for ERC777 was to improve the ERC20 token standard, particularly in the area of allowing greater control over holders' tokens. It does this through the use of token hooks: `tokensToSend` and `tokensReceived`.

One limitation for ERC20 tokens is the requirement of approving before allowing a smart contract to transfer funds from an EOA or smart contract (the latter is rare since contracts only work with trusted contracts). For a smart contract to transfer funds from a user, the user must first approve the smart contract to spend an allowance, after which the transfer would be allowed. This requires a double transaction: `approve` and `transferFrom`.

For example, if a user interacts with a smart contract on a DEX to swap an ERC20 token for another ERC20 token, executing a token swap would require the user to initiate an `approve` transaction, followed by a call to the recipeint smart contract on the DEX to initiate a `transferFrom`.

ERC777 improves this movement of tokens by using `tokensToSend` and `tokensReceived`. Essentially they allow the sender to control & reject which tokens they send, and the recipient to control & reject which tokens they receive. The latter hook allows the recipient to be called to decide what they want to do with the transaction based on some parameters (`data` & `operatorData`) and this allows the movement of tokens to occur in a single transaction instead of two.

ERC777 also allows operators and default operators to send and burn tokens on behalf of a token holder. ERC777 allows the holder to authorize or revoke operators through `authorizeOperator` and `revokeOperator`. Default operators have a different requirement but they have to be declared at contract creation and are invariants. Token holders themselves can be their own operators/default operators. Note that operators are other verfied contracts and not EOAs (EOAs cannot have functions to execute - which are needed for the hooks to work).

### ERC777 Transfers
Refer to the spec for the full details. But in short, ERC777 carries out transfers by:

0. Assuming an operator has been authorized. The operator will initiate the `send` to the recipient. The operator should be a contract that implements the `IERC777Sender` interface from OZ. Also assume that the recipient - if another contract, implements the `IERC777Recipient` interface from OZ. If the recipient is an EOA, assume it is registered with a contract that implements the `IERC777Recipient` interface. (Check specs and ERC1820 further for the notion of registering).
1. The ERC777 contract (or the contract that implements it) makes a token hook call (`_callTokensToSend`) to an address chosen by the msg.sender - the operator. The `tokensToSend` hook of the operator would then be called.
2. Update balances of BOTH msg.sender and recipient.
3. The ERC777 contract (or the contract that implements it) makes a token hook call (`_callTokensReceived`) to an address chosen by the recipient. The `tokensReceived` hook of the recipient will then be called.
4. In between, if spec requirements are not fulfilled, the transaction will revert.
5. Code for `_send` which is called by `send`:
```
function _send(
        address from,
        address to,
        uint256 amount,
        bytes memory userData,
        bytes memory operatorData,
        bool requireReceptionAck
    ) internal virtual {
        require(from != address(0), "ERC777: transfer from the zero address");
        require(to != address(0), "ERC777: transfer to the zero address");

        address operator = _msgSender();

        _callTokensToSend(operator, from, to, amount, userData, operatorData);

        _move(operator, from, to, amount, userData, operatorData);

        _callTokensReceived(operator, from, to, amount, userData, operatorData, requireReceptionAck);
    }
```

In the `transferFrom` implementation of ERC777:
```
    function transferFrom(address holder, address recipient, uint256 amount) public virtual override returns (bool) {
        address spender = _msgSender();
        _spendAllowance(holder, spender, amount);
        _send(holder, recipient, amount, "", "", false);
        return true;
    }
```
This allows the double transaction from ERC20's `approve`/`transferFrom` to be packed into a single function call through the use of the hooks.

## ERC1363

Link to specs: https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1363
Code: https://github.com/vittominacori/erc1363-payable-token/blob/master/contracts/token/ERC1363/ERC1363.sol

### Why was ERC1363 Introduced?
ERC1363 was introduced with the intention to improve the ERC20 token standard as well. In ERC20, once a transfer or approval is executed, no additional code can be executed; this brings about a limitation if developers wish to implement additional logic to the execution. This inadvertedly brings about a second limitation, that is, if the developer wishes to execute addition logic after a transfer or approval, then a separate transaction needs to be included - making gas spending twice.

ERC20 is designed this way such that it is more secure and scalable. Allowing addtional code to be executed after a transfer or approval could introduce security risks, for example, a malicious token could execute code that transfers all of a user's tokens to the attackers wallet; and it would also add overhead - like additional gas and time taken to verify transactions.

ERC1363 introduces a series of functions to help address the said limitations of ERC20, namely `transferAndCall`, `transferFromAndCall`, `approveAndCall`, `_checkOnApprovalReceived` and `_checkOnTransferReceived`.

Contracts that want to support `approveAndCall` must implement the `IERC1363Spender` interface, and contracts that want to support the `transferAndCall`, `transferFromAndCall` must implement the `IERC1363Receiver` interface. In a nut shell, the ERC1363 token contract will execute `_checkOnApprovalReceived` and `_checkOnTransferReceived` to check if those supporting contracts implement the appropriate interface. And if they do, additional calldata will be passed to the supporting contracts to execute additional code.

One interesting thing to note about the `IERC1363Receiver` and `IERC1363Spender` functions is that they both return `bytes4` which is essentially returning the hash of the function selector. So in essence, the ERC1363 contract just checks if the supporting contracts have either the `onTransferReceived` or `onApprovalReceived` function (See the implementation from OZ).

### Sample
An ERC1363 token would inherit this from OZ:
```
abstract contract ERC1363 is ERC20, ERC165, IERC1363, IERC1363Errors {
    ...

    function transferAndCall(address to, uint256 value, bytes memory data) public virtual returns (bool) {
        transfer(to, value);
        _checkOnTransferReceived(_msgSender(), to, value, data);
        return true;
    }

    function _checkOnTransferReceived(address from, address to, uint256 value, bytes memory data) private {
        if (to.code.length == 0) {
            revert ERC1363EOAReceiver(to);
        }

        try IERC1363Receiver(to).onTransferReceived(_msgSender(), from, value, data) returns (bytes4 retval) {
            if (retval != IERC1363Receiver.onTransferReceived.selector) {
                revert ERC1363InvalidReceiver(to);
            }
        } catch (bytes memory reason) {
            if (reason.length == 0) {
                revert ERC1363InvalidReceiver(to);
            } else {
                assembly {
                    revert(add(32, reason), mload(reason))
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

A contract supporting `transferAndCall`, `transferFromAndCall` would implement this from OZ:
```
interface IERC1363Receiver {
    function onTransferReceived(
        address operator,
        address from,
        uint256 value,
        bytes calldata data
    ) external returns (bytes4);
}
```

The contract that implements `IERC1363Receiver` would then be able to include additional code in this function to execute more logic after the transfer call, in a single transaction.


# Issues with ERC777?
The issue with ERC777 is a reentracy attack vector through the `tokensReceived` hook.

When executing any one of ERC777's token transfer methods(`send`, `operatorSend`, `transferFrom`, etc), the recipient's `tokensReceived` hook will be called and control would be given to the recipient's registered contract. A malicious contract could be an implementer for the said hook, and can leverage the call received from the target contract to reenter the target contract's calling function.

For example:
```
contract Target {
    function sendTokens(address _recipient, uint256 _amount) external {
        //checks
        //reduce msg.sender's balance

        IERC777(ERC777_TOKEN_ADDRESS).send(_recipient, _amount, "");

        //emit event
    }
}

contract AttackingContract is IERC777Recipient {
    //registration
    address public Target;

    function tokensReceived(
        address operator,
        address from,
        address to,
        uint256 amount,
        bytes calldata userData,
        bytes calldata operatorData
    ) external {
        require(msg.sender == TargetContractAddress, "Only TargetContractAddress");
        ITarget(Target).sendTokens(1 ether, AttackingContractAddress);
    }
}

```
If the recipient of the Target contract's function is registered with the attacking contract, then the attacking contract can leverage the call to reenter the `sendToken` function.